[THEME MUSIC]
>>GREGG BRADEN: In
1944, the architect
of quantum theory,
Max Planck, he
made a statement
that reverberated
throughout the scientific
community like a shockwave
of a huge earthquake.
While he was speaking at
a conference in Florence,
Italy, Planck stated,
there is no matter as such.
All matter, he said,
originates and exists only
by virtue of a force.
We must assume behind this force
the existence of a conscious
and an intelligent mind.
This mind, he said, is
the matrix of all matter.
Well, now we know
Planck was right.
There is a field of energy.
It's universal.
It's everywhere all of the time.
And it influences
everything that
happens in the world around us,
as well as the world within us.
But the new evidence now
goes beyond simply telling us
that this matrix exists.
The experiments are
revealing the rules
that govern Planck's
matrix, also now known
as The Divine Matrix
and how we can
apply those rules in our lives.
And that is what this
series is all about.
My name is Gregg
Braden, and I'd like
to welcome you to The Divine
Matrix, bridging time, space,
miracles, and belief.
I am your host for
this entire series.
And I am absolutely
thrilled to bring you
the discoveries, as well as
the controversy surrounding
these discoveries.
So let's begin
with the beginning.
Just what is The Divine Matrix?
Sometimes the best way to
describe the discovery and what
it means is through a real life
example from the real world.
Between 1978 and
1995, a small group
of scientists working
in a makeshift lab
tucked away on a
US military base,
they accomplished
something that was believed
to be impossible at the time.
From their small,
leaky laboratory
at Fort Meade, Maryland,
using simple techniques,
the researchers were
exploring a sophisticated
and a mysterious new frontier.
But their frontier
wasn't located
at the edges of the
galaxy or hidden deep
inside the quantum atom.
The realm they were exploring
was an inner frontier,
an advanced state of
consciousness that had a "Star
Trek"-like potential for
gathering information during
the Cold War years.
If someone had casually
walked into the room
while one of the
experiments was happening,
they could have
easily mistaken what
they saw for a lunchtime
relaxation class.
But in truth, nothing could've
been further from the truth.
The researchers, who were
sitting quietly, their eyes
closed, were learning
to access and sustain
a mysterious state
of consciousness
that you and I typically
pass through every night
as we drift into a deep sleep.
The bottom line
is that they were
trying to achieve three things.
The first thing they
were trying to do
was, on demand, access
a state of consciousness
without slipping
into a deeper sleep.
Number two, once they
were in this state,
they wanted to stay there.
They wanted to stay
suspended, conscious
and actively awake and able
to function from this place.
And number three, they
wanted to discover
how the state of
consciousness can actually
be a conduit to other locations
in the physical world,
remote locations that they could
actually see and hear and smell
and even touch without
ever leaving a laboratory.
Well, the technique
they were exploring
is called remote viewing.
And the name given
to the project
at the time, that
tells the whole story.
It was called Project Stargate.
And it was a military attempt
to explore the deepest
realms of human potential
for military applications
during the Cold War years.
The idea was simply this,
that valuable and potentially
life-saving information
could be gathered
from the field around us
without risking the lives of men
and women with boots
physically on the ground going
to these remote locations.
The key here is
that the projects
at Fort Meade, and
remote viewing sessions,
in general, these things
can only be possible
because the matrix exists.
It provides something for the
consciousness of the viewer
to travel through.
Well, Project Stargate
officially ended in 1995,
and it's recently
been declassified.
So we now have
access to the results
that were produced during those
early sessions at Fort Meade.
And I'd like to use
some of those results,
as well as others to give
you just an example of how
real this matrix is and
how deeply it underlies
our physical reality.
In a typical remote
viewing session,
there are two people
that are involved.
One is the viewer.
And this is the one
whose consciousness
is actually traveling.
And the second is
called the monitor.
And the role of the
monitor is simple.
The role of the monitor
is to guide the viewer
into a specific state
of consciousness,
and then to help the viewer
stay in that state using
predetermined protocols, and
to communicate from that state
without dropping
into a deeper sleep.
The monitor guides
the viewer, step
by step, to help them focus on
things like a precise location
or an object that can be
either in another room,
could be another
city, or it can be
on a battlefield on the
other side of the planet.
Here's an example
of what I mean.
The viewers are typically
given a target of some kind.
It can be a building.
It can be a location.
It can be a geographic area.
It can be a person.
They are given
physical coordinates.
It can be a street address.
It can be a latitude
and a longitude.
And the viewers receive
subtle sensations
while they're in
this altered state.
And one of the things
that the researchers found
during these early experiments
is that the sensations are not
the most present,
the most visible,
the brightest,
the most profound,
but often the very,
very subtle sensations.
And they have to be trained to
recognize and be able to detect
these very subtle sensations.
And they begin to sketch
on a piece of paper what
it is that they see, as well
as other sensations of smell
or if they feel touch or
they hear specific sounds.
The image that you're
seeing on the screen
is an example from one
of these early sessions.
The viewer was
given coordinates,
latitude and longitude, of a
place somewhere on the earth.
They had no idea
where this place was.
And from the altered
state, the viewer
began to sketch
what you're seeing.
And what you're seeing in
the upper right-hand corner
is a body of water.
The viewer felt that this was
an ocean, and that was noted.
You're seeing the
longitudinal runway or highway
that was drawn-- it's very
obvious-- in the center
of the image.
And then just to the left
and to the upper-left,
they saw what they perceived
as some kind of buildings
that were there.
So the viewer is sketching
only what he or she perceives
in this subtle state
without imposing
their ideas and
their viewpoints,
their filters of what
should or should not be.
And this is what
takes the training.
Well, the next image that
you're seeing on the screen
is an actual photograph
of the location
that the viewer picked up in
the remote sensing session.
This is a military target.
And what you see
in the photograph
is there is an ocean in the
upper part of the image.
There is actually a runway.
And so the viewer was right
on, right on this target.
There's a runway that is running
through the center of the image
and to the left.
We begin seeing the
structures and the buildings.
So what happens in these
sessions is sometimes
a remote viewer can pick
up things that may not
be visible in the photographs.
And sometimes the
photographs have
things that may not be
visible to the remote viewer.
When we put these together,
they give us the opportunity
to gather information without
ever having a person physically
go to gather that information.
Let me give you another example.
And I find this one
really fascinating
because of the specificity here.
The remote viewer
was given a location.
And in that location, the
viewer began to detect,
very, very clearly, a structure.
And you're seeing that
structure on the screen.
He didn't know what
the structure was,
but the wheels
were very obvious.
And the form of the
structure was very obvious.
And the viewer was trained to
record without projecting his
or her impressions-- in
this case, it was a male--
what it is that they saw.
Well, the next image that
you're seeing on the screen
is what was actually there.
This is an industrial crane.
And you can see-- look
at the similarities.
There are two wheels
at each corner,
and the viewer
got that right on.
Look at the
structure and the way
that this is moving
along a track.
The photographs now show us that
this was an industrial crane
from a military industrial
complex, a very specific crane
used only to move very
specific kinds of material.
So this gives the
military analyst insight
into what's happening
at this location in ways
that they could only have
if someone were physically
there watching this.
So I'm sharing these two
images for a purpose.
The images begin as
general descriptions.
And the specifics can then
be identified and honed into.
So for example, on the
crane, the researchers
could have asked for the viewer
to spend more time and more
detail and go deeper into
what that crane was all about
and how it was being used.
So at its peak, the original
remote viewing project,
it employed 22 people,
cost about $20 million.
And it was used on
more than 450 missions.
The project was so successful.
It located American
hostages in Iran.
It successfully pinpointed scud
missiles during the Gulf War
without ever sending men
and women into the desert,
risking their lives physically
to find those missiles.
It even located the plutonium
in North Korea in 1994
when there was a question
as to where North Korea was
in their nuclear program.
The success of the remote
viewing experiments
poses a key question.
And the question
is this, what is
the stuff the viewer's
consciousness is traveling
through that allows the
viewer to see countries
in secret locations on the
other side of the planet?
In a nutshell, the
question is this.
It all boils down
to what is in what
we call the empty
space of the universe.
What is in the space
of the nothing?
Well, to answer
this question, we've
opened the door to
one of the greatest
mysteries of our
existence, a mystery
that our ancestors describe
in the language of their time,
and that modern science
is just beginning
to understand in ours.
Almost universally, ancient
texts and Indigenous traditions
describe a field of energy
that connects all things.
I want to give you some examples
for how those descriptions have
been created in the
past so that you
can see the parallels to
what we now know exist today.
Chief Seattle, a 19th century
elder of the Suquamish people,
he described this
mystery, and I'm
going to read this specifically.
He said, "All things
are connected.
Man did not weave
the web of life.
He's merely a strand in it.
And whatever he does to the
web, he does to himself."
In the processes of
the ancient Hopi,
there are descriptions of
a web, or a net as well.
And this comes from
the Hopi prophecy
of what happened after the
first world of the Hopi
was threatened.
Spider Grandmother emerged
after the destruction
of the first world.
She emerged into
the Second World.
And the first thing
that she did was
she wove the web of
creation, upon which
her children and
her grandchildren
and all things in the
universe could exist.
Now I want to share with you
the exact words from the Hopi
prophecy describing
how this happened.
This is a quote, "When
the universe was still
so dark that not even shadows
could be seen in the night,
Spider Grandmother began to
sing her weaving song while she
danced across the sky.
As she spun her
thread, the Sky World
filled with light and
life as the stars, suns,
and the planets prepared to
give birth to their children."
Well, you can see
from this description,
it certainly is not scientific.
But it is telling us that
this universal essence,
this substance, what
the Hopi saw as a "web"
was what began the
beginning of the universe
as we know it today.
Well, the Hopi aren't alone.
In a similar way, the
ancient Buddhist traditions
describe how the great god Indra
created the web of creation.
"Far away in the heavenly
abode of the great god Indra,"
the texts say, "there
is a wonderful net
that stretches out
infinitely in all directions.
And at the intersection
of each point on the net
is a glittering jewel of light.
And that light is a
universe unto itself."
Well, the scientific
community is
beginning to describe
a structure that
sounds very similar to the
Hopi web and to India's net.
It's a structure that
underlies our everyday reality.
And even Einstein sensed that
this structure was there,
although as a scientist,
interestingly he shared it
from a very poetic description.
What Einstein said
to us, he said,
"Nature shows us only
the tail of the lion."
He says, "I do not doubt that
the lion belongs to the tail,
even though he cannot at once
reveal himself because of his
enormous size."
So what Einstein was saying,
from his perspective,
is there's something out there.
It's so big, but we cannot see
it from our vantage point where
we are in space and time.
And this underlying thinking
played a powerful role
as he developed his theories
of relativity and some
of the other theories
and mathematics concepts
that led to those theories.
So there's a common
theme that weaves its way
through each of
these descriptions,
through the web of
Spider Grandmother,
through the net
of the god Indra,
and through Einstein's
perspective, this idea
that there is something out
there that connects all things.
Well, in the beginning
of this program,
I shared Max Planck's statement,
his perspective of this essence
as well.
And Planck's statement
of this matrix
that underlies our
physical reality
is a perfect example of what
this thinking is all about.
So the question is,
what is this made of?
What is the web or the
net or the matrix made of?
And what are the rules that
govern this fundamental field
of energy?
And what does it mean
to us in our lives?
Well, in Season 1 of "Missing
Links," the Fifth Episode,
I described an experiment
performed in Switzerland
at the University
of Geneva in 1997.
I want to summarize the
experiment for you now.
And I'm going to do
it from a little bit
different perspective,
with a little bit
different emphasis from what
I did in that first season.
The experiment itself,
it was no secret.
It was reported over 3,400
journalists, educators,
scientists, and
engineers, in more than 40
different countries.
And the experiment
simply goes like this.
Scientists took a photon,
a particle of light.
This is the stuff the
atoms are made of.
They took a single photon.
They wanted to create
two identical photons.
So they took the one and broke
it into two separate photons
so that each one would
have identical properties.
And those two photons, they
isolated into a chamber.
And from this chamber, they
used fiber optic cables,
moving in opposite directions.
And one cable went seven miles
to a town seven miles away.
The other cable went seven
miles to another town
seven miles away from the place
where these photons began.
Each of the photons
was shot seven miles
in opposite directions.
So when they reached
their targets
they were 14 miles apart.
And this is where the
experiments actually
began, because what
the scientists found
was whatever they did to one
of the photons in one location,
in one moment in time,
the other photon acted
like it was having exactly
the same experience at exactly
the same moment in time.
They used atomic clocks to
tell them how long it took,
how much time did it take
for the information to move
from one photon to the other.
And this is where the problems
begin, because the atomic clock
said the time was zero.
There was no lag time.
It was instantaneous.
This breaks the rules
of Einstein's theory
of relativity.
Relativity says that
nothing can travel faster
than the speed of light.
For the two photons to have
exactly the same experience
at exactly the same
time with no lag time
means that somehow
the information
had to move from point A
to point B instantaneously,
faster than the speed of light.
This is where the
problems began.
So the behavior of the
photons is a problem
for conventional physics.
Those photons are defying the
laws of conventional physics.
However, they conform to
the laws of relativity.
And this is where the
experiment becomes
very relevant to
everything that we're
talking about when we talk
about this matrix of energy.
What the experiment tells us
is that particles that are once
joined physically remain
linked energetically
even though they are physically
separated from one another.
Two photons were
once a single photon.
Even though they were split
into two separate photons,
energetically, they
were connected.
The term is called
entanglement--
quantum entanglement.
And what it means is that
whatever is happening
to one of those
photons in one place,
whether it's 14 miles from the
other one on the other side
of the planet or in the
other side of the universe
is irrelevant,
they're entangled.
And they will always reflect
the exact same parameters in one
that are happening to the other.
Let me tell you why
this is so powerful, why
this is so important.
If we think about the
model of creation,
if we think about our
universe, scientists
tell us that the universe began
with a tremendous release,
a primal release of energy
that we call the Big Bang.
In the Big Bang,
energy was released,
and it began to expand.
And physical matter began
to expand and move away
from the point of the
release of the energy.
If we could reverse
the Big Bang,
if we could take
that physical matter
and bring it all back to the
point where it all began,
what scientists tell us
is, at that moment just
after the release of energy,
all the matter in the universe,
as big as the universe
appears, all that matter
would fit into the space about
the size of a single green pea,
that all the physical matter
from all of the bodies, all
of the planets, all the stars,
all of that physical matter
which is believed to
take up only about 4%
of the whole
universe-- scientists
tell us 96% of the
matter is missing.
96% of our universe,
they believe, is empty.
So that 4% would be compacted
into a single sphere
about the size of a green pea,
a really hot single sphere.
They tell us about 18
billion, million, million,
million degrees.
And when I talked to the
scientists about that,
I said, now how do
you really know that?
And they say, well, we don't.
[CHUCKLES] They say, but we
know that it was really hot.
So when all of that matter was
compressed into that single
green pea-- here's the key--
everything was connected.
Everything was connected.
And even though the force
of that primal release
has allowed the
universe to expand,
and it's expanding today,
and the physical matter
is no longer
physically connected,
the experiment that we
saw with the twin photons
suggests that all physical
matter is still connected,
that we are still
connected to one another.
We're connected to our planet.
We're connected to other
stars and other planets.
This is the power
of understanding
what the matrix is all about.
The key is that the matrix
is not a byproduct that
happened after the Big Bang.
Let me say this again.
The matrix that
we're talking about,
it's not something that happened
after the primal release.
The matrix is the release.
the Big Bang is the matrix.
It's emerging as
itself, into itself.
Now the implications of
what I'm saying to you
and what these experiments
are showing are mind-boggling.
We're going to explore them
throughout this series.
But I really want to
emphasize that the field that
connects all things, the web,
the net, Planck's matrix,
The Divine Matrix,
this field, it
is the release of energy itself.
Where did the field come from?
It depends on who you talk to.
The ancient Vedas, for
example, over 7,000 years
before present, they
offer us a clue.
It's not in science.
But they describe a time
before the beginning
when what they call as
Brahman, "The unborn in whom
all existing things abide.
The one manifesting as the many,
the formless putting on forms."
This is the way the Rigveda
describes this primal energy
that is happening as
this release of energy
that we call the Big Bang.
So what we're finding
is that the field that
fills the empty space, this
96% of the universe that
is believed to be missing,
it's not missing at all.
It is a form of energy
that's been with us
from the very beginning.
And this is why I think
this is so important.
And cosmologists
at the University of California
in Santa Cruz, agrees.
What he says is that "The
Big Bang did not occur
'somewhere in space.'
But it occupied
the whole of space.
The Big Bang was
space itself, bursting
into a new kind of energy."
And that's the end of
the quote from him.
So with these ideas
in mind, let's go back
to that twin photon experiment.
What really happened?
Two photons, 14
miles apart, having
exactly the same experience
at exactly the same period
of time.
How did the information
get from one to the other?
Well, that's a trick question,
because now we know it didn't.
It didn't have to get
from one to the other,
because the information
was already there.
And this is the point.
This is the controversy.
This is the mystery.
It didn't need to travel at all.
It was already present.
The experiment is telling
us that we are still
connected to people
and places, no matter
where on the universe, where
on the planet they may be.
This is why intuition
works the way
it works between a
mother and her son,
for example, in a battlefield
halfway around the world.
We'll see this in
future episodes.
This is why remote viewing
works, that we just
saw in this episode.
This is why experiments in
teleportation are working.
Russell Targ, the co-founder
of the cognitive sciences
program at Stanford
Research Institute in Menlo
Park, California, he
describes this connection
in a really beautiful way.
Listen to what he says.
Russell Targ says, "We
live in a non-local world,
where things physically
separated from one
another can nonetheless be in
instantaneous communication."
That's the end of the quote.
Well, the Big Bang and
the twin photon experiment
tells us why Targ's statement is
so powerful, why it's so true.
In 2004, physicists from
Germany and China and Austria
reported the first
successful experiment
with teleportation of
quantum information.
Results are out there
for everyone to see.
They're reported in the very
prestigious journal "Nature,"
Volume 430, in the year 2004.
And what they did was they
teleported the blueprint
for quantum particles
from one place to another.
And they did it successfully.
This was the first step.
Huge implications now
in data encryption
and in data security and
information transfer, then
ultimately, the quantum transfer
of stuff, like you and me.
So all the things that I'm
talking to you about right now,
all of these things, they're
only possible because something
exists in the nothing,
because something fills
the space of the universe.
So as excited as the scientists
are about the twin photon
experiment, about the
teleportation experiment,
in the excitement of
reporting the strangeness
of the outcomes,
I sense that they
may be missing the
most significant part
of those experiments, what those
experiments are telling us.
They may be missing the most
shattering implications,
because for all of these
experiments to work,
it means that they must be
happening within something.
We're coming back to
the same question--
what is the stuff that makes
these experiments possible?
We know it's a field,
but what is it really?
What is it made of?
How does it work?
Well, in a makeshift
laboratory hidden
in the basement of a Case
Western Reserve University
building in Cleveland,
Ohio, 100 years ago,
two scientists performed
the first experiment
that was supposed to answer
this question, once and for all.
In the next episode,
we'll see the results
of this landmark experiment
and the first scientific study
designed to detect the matrix
and the secrets that it holds.
I want to thank you
for joining me today.
Be sure to tune in for our next
all-new episode of "The Divine
Matrix"--
bridging time and space,
miracles and belief."
[THEME MUSIC]